=== Page 1 ===
Fourteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Scientific Report, 1998 
Department of Ocean Development, Technical Publication No 12, pp 187-192 
A l g a l Colonization of the Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica
RAJAN KUMAR GUPTA and A K KASHYAP
Centre of Advanced Study in Botany
Banaras Hindu University
Varanasi 221 005
Abstract
The principal means of dispersal of microalgae in the Schirmacher Oasis appears to be
air currents and through human vectors A number of alga, typically soil algae, were
identified as potential colonizers Sample material included dust on equipments, containers
loaded on the ship, personal luggage of the expeditioners, life boat of the ship and soil
adherent to fresh vegetables imported to Maitn Airborne dispersal within Antarctica was
found to disperse algal propagules in the vicinity of Maitn station, although numbers were
low The ability of indigenous Antarctic algae and exogenous potential colonizers to survive
freeze-thaw cyclcs, high salinity and desiccation will be investigated at home laboratory at
Banaras Hindu University.
Introduction
The usual image of Antarctica is an ice-bound continent with a few areas
of exposed land (ca. 2%) where solar heating of rock and soil during summer
allows the growth of sparse terrestrial life. There are considerable circumstan-
tial evidences that Antarctica receives a steady supply of microbial and
bryophyte diaspores from land masses to the north (Walton, 1990). Also the
migratory birds might be effective vectors (Schlichting et al., 1978). Since
humans set foot in the continent in 1895, it is likely that we have also been
vectors for the dispersal of alien microorganisms to Antarctica (Walton, 1990).
T h e need for investigations focussing on the detection and monitoring of
exogenous organisms was noted by Rudolph and Benninghouf (1977), but
since then there has been little progress (Vincent, 1988). Scientific Commu-
nity on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has recommended that protection of the
Antarctic environment should include the "prevention of the introducing and
establishment of non- indigenous species to the greatest extent possible"
(Broady, 1992).

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 2 ===
188 
Rajan Kumar Gupta and A. K. Kashyap 
Algae are the most wide spread and abundant organisms in terrestrial and
aquatic habitats of Antarctic ecosystems. It is, therefore, important to assess the
possibility of exogenous algae being dispersed to, and establishing in, these
habitats. It has been reported that world wide there are increasing numbers of
examples of algae being dispersed to new areas by human and then growing to
nuisance proportions. Two examples are the dispersal of toxic marine dian-
oflagellates in the ballast water of ships (Hallegraeff et al, 1988) and the
introduction of the fresh water alga "water net" Hydrodictyon reticulatum into
New Zealand lakes (Caffey and Miller, 1988). Likewise, it is possible that
humans could be the vector for the dispersal of algae to Antarctica which might
then establish vigorous populations and degrade the scientific value of formerly
pristine habitats, as well as change unique continent of great conservation value.
Materials and Methods
I. Analysis of the Propagule Bank of Snow and Ice
Ice and snow was collected using asceptic precautions. Sample was melted
and filtered through membrane filters (micropore filters) and was examined
microscopically for the presence of recognisable algae and was also used for
inoculating cultures. For inoculation, the filters laid on the surface of the moist
sterilized soils and on the surface agarized mineral salt media (BG-11) (Rippka
et al, 1979) and incubated in BOD incubator at 20 - 25oC for four to five days
and observations were made under the microscope.
II. Analysis of the "Propagule Bank" of Soils
The algal flora in the vicinity of Maitri station and at other sites of
Schirmacher Oasis was analysed floristically using direct microscopic exami-
nation of samples, and using "moist plate enrichment cultures" and mineral salt
nutrients.
III. The Detection of Non-indigenous Algae Brought to Antarctica by
Human Vectors
Samples were taken from following: containers, scapping from people's
shoes, clothes, equipments, ship, fresh vegetables used in the station soil from
the house plants (green house). Samples were examined under microscope and
inoculated using following techniques.
(a) agarized media (BG-11 + N)

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 3 ===
Algal Colonization of the Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica 189
(b) liquid mineral salt nutrient (BG-11 + N)
(c) moist plate enrichment cultures using salts from green house of Maitri
as substrata.
IV. The Detection of Airborne Algae
Sticky slides were used for trapping the airborne algal propagules at various
sites and investigated under microscope.
V. Test for the Ability of Airborne Algae to Colonise Soils
Moistened sterile soil was exposed to the atmosphere for standard periods
(2-24 h). Petri dishes containing mineral nutrient medium and also soil were
placed at various sampling sites in order to the optimise the deposition of
propagules onto the soil surfaces. After the exposure the soil surfaces were
covered and treated as moist plate enrichment cultures i.e., incubated in the
light at warm temperature (20±5oC). The developed algae was identified under
microscope.
Results
A. The Potential Antarctic Colonizers
The various algal species belonging to the three classes of algae i.e.,
Cyanophyceae, Chlorophyceae and Baccilariophyceae were identified out of
which most of the algae belong to Cyanophyceae (Table 1)
B. Establishment of Exogenous Algae
Direct microscopic examination of macroscopic growth of algae occurring
in vicinity of Maitri station as well as culture studies of some other sites did not
reveal the presence of exogenous algae. The algal species detected have also
been recorded previously from Maitri station and vicinity. However, because
all were identified only to generic level it is not yet possible to make sure with
regard to their simmilarity at species and intraspecific levels. Samples have
been collected and further identifications are being made at home laboratory at
BHU.
C. Dispersal of Algae by Human and Natural Vectors in Antarctica
A postulated dispersal pathway of algae to and within Antarctica has been
presented in Fig. 1. Despite of using a large number of sticky slides for the
arrival of airborne diaspores, very few have been detected. None were found

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 4 ===
190
Rajan Kumar Gupta and A. K. Kashyap
Table 1 : Potential Antarctic Colonizers
A.
B.
C.
Cyanophyceae
1. 
Nostocales
Nostocaceae
Oscillatoria
Nostoc
Phormidium
Lyngbya
Calothrix
Schizothrix
Tolypothrix
2. 
Chroococcales
Gloeocapsa
Aphanocapsa
Aphanothece
Chroococcus
Chlorophyceae
1. 
Chlorococcales
Chlorococcum
Baccilariophyceae
1. 
Pennales
Naviculoideae
Pinnularia
Nitzschoideae
Hantzschia
in Dakshin Gangotri region. Only three have been recorded in Maitri region
which are 
Cosmarium, 
Oscillatoria, Phormidium sps.
Acknowledgements
The author (RKG) is grateful to Department of Ocean Development, Dr.
S.D. Sharma, Leader XIV Antarctica Expedition and to Dr. Sudhakar Rao,
Station Commander, XI Wintering team for providing the facilities to carry out
the experiments. The author is also thankful to Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research for financial help.

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 5 ===
Algal Colonization of the Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica 
191
A - non-indigenous, introduced
initially by human vectors
B - non-indigenous, intercontinental
air borne dispersal
C - indigenous, local and regional
dispersal
Fig. 1: Postulated Dispersal Pathways of Algae to and within Antarctica 
MAITRI
SHIP

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 6 ===
192 
Rajan Kumar Gupta and A. K. Kashyap 
References
Broady, P.A. (1992). Identification of propagules-Algae. BIOTAS Manual of Methods for
Antarctic Terrestrial and Fresh Water Research, ed. by D.D. Wynn-Williams. Cam-
bridge, Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research, 24p.
Caffey, B.T. and Miller, ST. (1988). Hydrodictyon reticulatum L. Lagerheim (Chloro-
phyta). A new genus record from New Zealand. N.ZJ. Bot.,26,317-320.
Hallegraeff, G.M., Steffensen, D.A. and Werherbee, R. (1988). Three estuarine Australian
dianoflagellates that can produce paralytic shellfish toxins. J. Plankton Res., 10, 533-
541.
Rippka, R., Deruelles, J., Waterbury, J.B., Herdman, M., and Stanier, R.Y. (1979), Generic
assignments, strain histories and properties of pure cultures of cyanobacteria. J. Gen 
Microbiol. 111:1-61.
Rudolph, E and Benninghof, W.S. (1977). Competitive and adaptive responses of invading
versus indigenous biotas in Antarctica—A plea for organized monitoring. Adaptations
within Antarctic Ecosystems, ed. by G.A. Llano. Washington D.C., Smithsonian
Institution, 1211-1225.
Vincent, W.F. (1988). Microbial Ecosystems of Antarctica. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ.
Press, 304p.
Schlichting, J.R., Speziale, B.J. and Zink, R.M. (1978). Dispersal of algae and protozoa by
Antarctic flying birds. Antarct. J.U.S., 13(4), 147-149.
Walton, D.W.H. (1990). Colonization of terrestrial habitats- organisms, opportunities and
occurrence. Antarctic Ecosystems, Ecosystems, Ecological change and conservation,
ed. by K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel. Berlin, Springer 51-60.