=== Page 1 ===
Fifteenth Indian Expedition to Antarctica, Scientific Report, 1999 
Department of Ocean Development, Technical Publication No. 13, pp 109-116 
ALGAL COLONIZATION OF SCHIRMACHER
OASIS, ANTARCTICA
S.P. Shukla, R.K. Gupta and A.K. Kashyap
Centre of Advanced Study in Botany, Banaras Hindu University
Abstract
Algae are the major component of Antarctic freshwater and soil microflora. The relative
ease with which these organisms can grow on dust and soil, adhere to vegetables, clothing
and shoes of expeditioners, there is a possibility of transportation of algal propagules to
Antarctic environment. Observations were made on alternate days for the detection of algal
propagules growing on soil adhered to vegetables and dust deposited on containers, equip-
ments and shoes and clothing of expeditioners by microscopic analysis of soil and dust
samples, throughout the voyage to Antarctica. Algal microflora of thirty lakes was analysed
and a list of algal species present in different lakes was prepared after microscopic
observations of the samples. Camera - Lucida drawings were made for morphological
characterisation and life-cycle pattern studies. Aerial biota was also studied by placing sticky
slides at different locations around 'Maitri'.
Introduction
It is now well established that microbial and bryophyte diaspores are
reaching Antarctica from land masses. (Walton, 1990). Air current and migrat-
ing birds are supposed to be the most effective vectors for the transportation of
the spores and propagules of 'alien' organisms to the Antarctic environment
(Schlichting, 1978; Broady & Smith, 1994). Since the start of expeditions to
Antarctica and establishment of permanent manned stations, there is a possi-
bility of dispersal of alien micro-organism to Antarctica through human agency
(Cameron et al, 1977).
Detection and assessment of impacts of invading micro-organisms in
Antarctica was emphasised long-back by Rudolph and Benninghoff (1977). It
was suggested that Antarctica is the remotest region of the earth where human
assisted biological invasion can be studied (Vincent, 1988), Among the organ-
isms entering the Antarctic environment due to human activities, few may
colonise due to their ability to survive at low and fluctuating temperature and
extreme desiccation. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) has

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 2 ===
110 
S.P, Shukla et al. 
recommended that Antarctic environment should be protected from 'alien'
species and efforts should be initiated for preventing the introduction and
establishment of non-indigenous species to greatest extent possible (Broady,
1992). The baseline identification of indigenous species and identification of
human introductions help in the assessment of impact of introductions on the
native populations. Systematic microbiology is one of the critical factors for
the detection and use of indicator species in environment impact assessment
and also for an up-to-date record of indigenous flora as well as introduced
species that survived.
Material and Methods
I. 
Analysis of the propagule bank of snow and ice : 
Ice and snow were collected using asceptic precautions. Samples were
melted and filtered through membrane filters (micropore filters) and was
examined microscopically for the presence of recognisable algae and was also
used for inoculating cultures. For inoculation, the filters laid on the surface of
the moist sterilised soils and on the surface of agarized mineral salt media
(BG-11) (Rippka et al., 1979) and incubated in BOD incubator at 20-25°C for
four to five days and observations were made under the microscope.
II. 
Analysis of the "propagule bank" of soils : 
The algal flora in the vicinity of Maitri station and at other sites of
Schirmacher Oasis was analysed floristically using direct microscopic exami-
nation of samples, and using "moist plate enrichment cultures" and mineral salt
nutrients.
III. The detection of non-indigenous algae brought to Antarctica by
human vectors : 
Samples were taken from : containers, scrapping from people's shoes,
clothes, equipments, ship, fresh vegetables used in the station, soil from the
house plants (green house). Samples were examined under microscope and
inoculated using following techniques:
(a) Agarized media (BG11 + N)
(b) Liquid mineral salt nutrient (BG-11 + N)
(c) Moist plate enrichment cultures using soil from green house of Maitri
as substrata.

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 3 ===
Algal 
Colonization 
of 
Schirmacher 
Oasis, 
Antarctica 
111
IV. The detection of airborne algae : 
Sticky slides were used for trapping the airborne algal propagules at various
sites and investigated under microscope.
V. 
Test for the ability of airborne algae to colonise soils : 
Moistened sterile soils was exposed to the atmosphere for standard period
(2-24 h). Petri dishes containing mineral nutrient medium and also soil placed
at various sampling sites in order to the optimise the deposition of propagules
onto the soil surfaces. After the exposure the soil surfaces were covered and
treated as moist plate enrichment culture i.e., incubated in the light at warm
temperature (20±5°C). The development algae was identified under micro-
scope.
Results
(A) Algae detected on board : 
The algal species viz. Chlorella vulagaris, Chlorococcum sp. and Phor-
midium uncinatum were recorded in the soil and dust samples removed from
the surface of vegetables, containers and equipments, life-boats and anchor of
the ship. One marine form of Oscillatoria was detected in ballast water
deposited around the anchor at Goa. No algal species was detected in soil
adhering to the shoes of the expeditioners. Two cyanobacteria Phormidium sp. 
and Aphanothece sp. were detected in the moss-peat which was carried to
Antarctica for experimental purpose.
(B) Algal microflora of Schirmacher Oasis : 
Microscopic observations of the soil, water, moss and lichen samples
collected from thirty lakes of Schirmacher Oasis, Antarctica revealed presence
of a total of sixteen algal species. A list of the species encountered in different
lakes has been presented in Table-1. Apart from this samples of stagnant water
Table-1: Algal sp. observed on materials carried during voyage to Antarctica
S.N. 
Name of Algae 
Class 
Observed on
1
2
3
4
5
6
Chlorell vulgaris 
Chlorococcum sp. 
Phormidium uncinatum
Oscillatoria sp. 
Phormidium sp. 
Aphanothece sp. 
Chlorophyceae
Chlorophyceae
Cyanophyceae
Cyanophyceae
Cyanophyceae
Cyanophyceae
soil adhered to vegetables
soil adhered to vegetables
soil adhered to anchor
soil adhered to anchor
peat moss
peat moss

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 5 ===
Algal 
Colonization 
of 
Schirmacher 
Oasis, 
Antarctica 
113
pools (which received kitchen water of Maitri) were also analysed under
microscope. These pools exhibited a greater species diversity than the adjoining
lakes.
( C ) Aerial translocation of algal propagules : 
Two cyanobacterial species viz. Oscillatoria sp. and Phormidium sp. were
detected on the sticky slides placed at four locations around 'Maitri' (i.e. IMD
balloon launching laboratory, Generator room 'Aditya', above summer hut
kitchen "Annapurna" and on the roof of 'Gimar'). Analysis of soil collected
from approximately 30 m height on the east, west, north and south faces of
'Trishul Hill' revealed maximum algal diversity on the west face followed by
south. The list of the organisms encountered have been presented in TabIe-2.
Discussion
Schirmacher Oasis is one of ice-free regions of Antarctica (Fig.l). Two
permanent manned stations 'Novalazarevskaya' and 'Maitri' are situated in this . 
region. A huge quantity of food material, equipments and other life supporting
articles are transported to these permanent stations. Presence of algae on
vegetables, ballast water and soil adhered to anchor confirms that algae can be
introduced into Antarctic environment through human activities. Algal diver-
sity varied among lakes and lakes inhabited by mosses and lichens exhibited
maximum diversity (Table-1). Stagnant water pools are probably most per-
turbed ecosystem and provide most favourable conditions for establishment of
non-indigenous micro-organisms.
Aerial translocation seems to be an important mode of dispersal of algae
to different locations in the Oasis (Fig.2). Presence of four algal taxa on
different sides (i.e. North, South, East and West facing) of 'Trishul-Hill' at a 
height of 30 m suggests that air is an important factor for dispersal of some
algal species (Table-3). South-west wind direction appears to be most effective
in dispersal of algae as the diversity was maximum on southward face followed
by west.
Table-3 : Algal species present on different sides of Trishul Hill' at 30 m height
North 
Phormidium sp., Oscillatoria 
South 
Phormidium sp., Oscillatoria, Gloeocapsa sp., Chiorococcum sp.
East 
Phormidium sp.
West 
Phormidium sp., Gloeocapsa sp., Chroococus limneticus

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 6 ===
114 
S.P.Shukla et al.

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 7 ===
Algal 
Colonization 
of 
Schirmacher 
Oasis, 
Antarctica 
1X5
Fig.2 :Postulated dispersal pathways of algae to and within Antarctica. Arrows indicate 
direction of dispersal from one site to another 
Assessment of potential of survival and growth of non-indigenous algae
under natural environment of this continent is not recommended (conservation
of Antarctic fauna and flora, Article-IX) therefore a detailed physiological
characterisation of potential Antarctic colonisers in required by exposing them
to laboratory conditions which closely match the conditions, they would
encounter in Antarctica. These studies should also include the test for survival
and growth under realistic physicochemical conditions by using natural Ant-
arctic water and soils. The ability of exogenous algae to colonise in the presence
of native populations also needs an investigation.
Acknowledgements
Authors are thankful to Department of Ocean Development and Sri Arun
Chaturvedi, Leader, 15th Antarctic Expedition for providing the facilities. SPS
is thankful to Sri B. Mitra (ZSI) and Mr. M.K. Pant (DARL) for co-operation
and helps in collection of samples. Thanks are also due to CSIR for financial
assistance.

--- Page Break ---

=== Page 8 ===
116 
S.P. Shukla et al.
References
Broady, P.A. (1992). Identification of propagules - Algae BIOTAS Manual of Methods for
Antarctic terrestrial and freshwater Research. Ed. By D.D. Wynn - Williams. Camridge,
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) pp. 24.
Broady, P.A. Smith, A. (1994) A preliminary investigation of the diversity, survivability
and dispersal Algae introduced into Antarctica by human activity. Proc. NIPR Symp. Polar
Bial, 7 : 185-19'7.
Cameron, R.E., Honour, R.C. and Morelli, F.A. (1977) Environmental impact studies of
Antarctic sites : Adaptations within Antarctic ecosystems. Ed. By G.A. Llano, Washington
D.C., Smithsonian Institute: 1: 57-1176.
Rippka, R., Deruelles, J., Waterbury, J.B., Herdman M. and Stanier, R.Y. (1979) Generic
assignments, strain histories and properties of pure cultures of cyanobacteria. J. Gen.
Microbial 11 : 1-61.
Rudolph, E. and Benninghof, W.S. (1977): Competitive and adaptive responses of invading
versus indigenous biotas in Antarctica - A plea for organised monitoring. Adaptations within
Antarctic ecosystems Ed. By G.A. Clano. Washington D.C., Smithsonian Institute, 1211-
1225.
Schlichting, J.R., Speziale, B.J. and Zink, R.M. (1978): Dispersal of algae and protozoa by
Antarctic flying birds. Antarc. J.V.S., 13 (4), 147-149.
Vicent, W.F. (1988) Microbial Ecosystems of Antarctica. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ.
Press, pp. 304.
Walton, D.W.H. (1990): Colonisation of terrestrial habitats - organisms, opportunities and
occurrence. Antarctic Ecosystems, Ecosystems, Ecological change and conservation, ed. by
K.R. Kerry and G. Hempel Berlin, Springer, 51-60.